[Music]
welcome to topcast for a special episode
an omnibus type episode so to speak
99 minutes for my 99th episode devoted
to the beginning of infinity the book
that started my podcast this is going to
be
not a typical episode in the sense that
often what i do is read part of the book
and then reflect upon that book instead
what i'll be doing is simply giving
nothing but my reflections without ever
referring directly to the book there'll
be very few quotes there might be one or
two here but i'm not going to have the
book in front of me and reading passages
out of it for that of course you can go
to
the rest of my podcast series on the
beginning of infinity where i do
extensive readings and longer
reflections this is going to be very
much a
personal
set of reflections on what i got from
each and every chapter from the
beginning of infinity so it'll be very
much in my words and shouldn't be taken
as representative of what really is in
the chapter uh david provides summaries
at the end of every single chapter and i
guess that would be his main points but
this will be my main takeaways from the
book and at the end of each chapter that
i discuss i'm going to give the two or
three sentence summary of what i think
that chapter was about and again nothing
official in this this is just my
takeaway so many people out there might
quite disagree with what i'm taking away
as the central message of that chapter
the beginning of infinity is special in
many ways firstly as naval ravicant has
said there seems to be many people who
purchase the work
somewhat fewer readers of the work and
fewer still people who actually have a
good understanding of what's being said
there this is somewhat perplexing to me
in a sense because i don't know why
people wouldn't persevere with the book
i get why you wouldn't start the book to
begin with it's a fairly large tone and
maybe you just want it to look good on
your shelf there but if you begin
reading it surely you find it
captivating it's amazing i mean it's
providing you with a different worldview
a different way of seeing
not only science and progress but just
about every area of human interest it's
in some way or other captured there
within the beginning of infinity and it
provides an optimistic alternative to
all of those other misconceptions and
world views that are out there at the
moment i'm somewhat reminded of what
poppa said when it came to problems in
one's life he said that you know
essentially the purpose of life to some
extent is to meet a problem to see its
beauty and to fall in love with it to
get married to it and to live with it
happily till death do ye part unless you
should meet another and even more
fascinating problem
end quote from papa
well much the same could be said of a
good book or even a sublime book like
this one to meet it to see its beauty
and to fall in love with it and
basically to spend days and weeks poring
over it i'm sure some books are possibly
pumped out rather quickly like so many
blog posts are i know the feeling of
having a particular thought tossing it
over in my mind for a while and then
feeling the urgent need to commit it to
the page in the form of a longer or
shorter blog post
i tend to think it over sometimes for
only a matter of hours before committing
it to the page but i also know the
feeling of having an idea committing it
to the page in draft form and then
tossing it over for days and weeks until
it's refined to the point where i think
yeah that's worth publishing and so i
think that many other books like popular
science books and things they tend to
read a little bit like blog posts of the
first kind there's something the authors
have just had to say and had to publish
very quickly or perhaps they've tossed
it over in their minds for weeks and
months perhaps a year or two in some
special cases but i know
the beginning of infinity took something
like a decade to write and it really
does show the beginning of infinity
stands apart because each page really
does have a new insight it's often
something that counters prevailing
misconceptions and it's clear
exceedingly clear and not merely clear
but eloquent and this sets it apart but
the fact that it is so insightful i
think is one reason that people might
not at times persevere or even see the
subtle importance of what's being said
if you're being hit rapid fire on every
page with new ways of thinking about
things one might dare say everything's
it can be disorienting and of course
this is the reason for my channel here
and the podcast that i produce and the
blog posts and so on because as so many
others have said some sentences in the
beginning of infinity could be entire
paragraphs some paragraphs could be
entire chapters and some chapters
could be entire books in themselves so
some unpacking and discussion is not
necessarily needed but it is warranted
it's fun to engage with this stuff and
see where the new ideas could
potentially lead and how they might
inform science philosophy decision
making and thinking and progress broadly
so this episode is an unusual one the
plan is this i'm going to take about
four to five minutes per chapter and
just highlight what i think is important
what was key for me out of that chapter
as i say this time no quotes no reading
nothing direct maybe except some
incidental quotes here and there that i
might remember off by heart or i feel i
need to just pull out of the book but in
the main it's going to be my
interpretation of the chapters so it's
more like a translation of a kind so
it's more like the beginning of infinity
filtered through me in a sense so expect
to lose something expect to lose a lot
in that process as i always say
none of this is a substitute for the
book itself at 18 chapters and four to
five minutes per chapter that gives me a
few minutes here at the beginning to do
this introduction and maybe some minutes
at the end to do a little bit of a
conclusion and what i'll do with these
four to five minute breakdowns of each
chapter is probably just publish them
separately on twitter as well as putting
them together here and now for you as a
complete podcast and the reason for that
is once again i hope it really does
entice people to pick up the book and
delve
more deeply into it i know i've already
done the 45 episodes on the beginning
infinity and that is in fact close to
two complete days worth of continuous
beginning of infinity content not
counting the questions with david and
the other things that i've published as
well but this is an interesting
challenge i think it's important to
accept the reality sometimes that some
people simply won't ever read the book
but the ideas in this book are just so
important especially right now and will
continue to be that we need to repackage
them over and over again
in formats more accessible to some
people the naval podcast is doing that i
think very successfully if the feedback
is anything to go by naval has great
reach of course and extremely helpfully
a deep understanding and appreciation of
these ideas and one hopes that anyone
inspired by naval when it comes to the
beginning of infinity and the fabric of
reality will turn to those books and so
that's what i hope to do here as well
turn to the book for more details of
course there's so much
popper and deutsch content out there now
all of david's interviews in various
places and the various other podcasts
that are out there now as well the to
explain podcast the fallible animals
podcast the theory of anything podcast
the lunar society podcast to name just a
few david has really inspired an entire
ecosystem of online podcasts and youtube
channels and blogs so it's really
getting difficult for someone who's a
big fan like me to even keep up with
everything that's out there now and so i
guess personally i'm not really helping
things right now by producing yet more
beginning of infinity content it's an
embarrassment of riches to some extent
and i don't just mean the popper and
deutsch related material i also mean the
broad intellectual science philosophy
broadcasting space all that said
i think our corner the david deutsch
corner of the internet really is still
david against goliath david being david
deutsch and the rest of us on his side
of the ledger and goliath being well
mainstream misconceptions mainstream
academia and intellectual culture and
all those other kinds of so-called
rationality that are out there some
better than others but none quite
getting to the heart of the matter about
why it is we need to be optimistic why
it is that we continue to make progress
and what it is about science and
philosophy and reason that really sets
humanity apart at this particular epoch
in time and the in people in the
enlightenment tradition as compared to
everything that has gone before
as i say at the end of each chapter that
i'm about to go through i'm going to
give you my personal key learning from
the chapter emphasis on my
others might very well take something
else more important away and maybe
david's intention was something
completely different to what i say is
the central message that i got of course
the worst thing about even attempting
this of course is that i've already said
that each chapter could be an entire
book in and of itself so why would i go
in the opposite direction and try and
reduce the chapter to a few sentences i
just thought it would be a cool curious
little challenge that i'd set for myself
so without further ado let's get to my
brief reflections upon each chapter in
the beginning of infinity the most
ground-breaking work so far of the 21st
century chapter one the reach of
explanations
in this chapter david deutsch makes some
genuine progress in epistemology prior
to papa we had this notion of empiricism
that the way in which knowledge was
generated was you went out into the
world and you observed the world and
from your observations you managed to
derive knowledge from those observations
in some way shape or form that was never
really specified empiricism at least put
observation at the center of knowledge
creation it was a relief to be relieved
from
superstitious notions of how knowledge
might be generated or the idea that
certain authorities possessed the
knowledge the final truth to a certain
extent or the best version of a truth
and everyone else should agree with what
the authority said was known or said was
true we know that empiricism can't be
true because we know that well seeing is
not believing our go-to example in the
beginning infinity and various other
places and the one which i always turn
to is this idea of
observing stars at night and seeing
small
dim points of light
but is that what a star is a small
dim point of light no and no amount of
repeatedly making those same
observations over and over again can get
you one jot closer to the nature of what
a star really is what we now know
is that stars are not cold but hot not
dim but bright they are extremely
distant hot furnaces fusing hydrogen
nuclei protons into helium and other
more complicated processes as well and
we only get to that notion not because
we can actually observe the core of
stars where these reactions are taking
place in fact it's very rare for us to
be able to observe directly a star
whenever you take even a powerful
telescope the star still appears as
simply a point of light there are a few
exceptions so we're not observing stars
directly at all let alone the reactions
that are going on inside them so how did
we get this knowledge we had to
conjecture it we had to guess it and
then the function of our observations
using telescopes and various other
things was to criticize those theories
and insofar as those theories were
criticized and survived the criticism
then we accepted that we had learned
something new via this method of
conjecture as papa told us about what
the nature of stars are eventually our
theory of stars became a good
explanation and what we mean by good
explanation is something that is hard to
vary and this is the insight that david
deutsch provides us in chapter one it is
a genuine
epistemological discovery prior to david
deutsch popper rightly demarcated
science from non-science via this
criterion of falsification however as
david points out falsifiable theories
are a dime a dozen after all any crank
wearing a sandwich board on the corner
of the street saying the world is going
to end next tuesday has a falsifiable
theory and it will be falsified but
simply because it's a falsifiable theory
doesn't make it scientific just because
it's testable doesn't make it scientific
someone can say eat a kilogram of grass
it'll cure your common cold it's a
falsifiable theory but that does not
make it scientific so what is david
deutsch's great insight what we're after
not only in science but everywhere are
good explanations and a good explanation
is something that accounts for what is
really going on in the world and which
also is hard to vary which means every
single part of the explanation
serves a purpose and in this view
therefore experiments and observations
serve the purpose of choosing between
these theories that we've already
guessed it's very rare for us to have
more than one explanation for any given
phenomena but where we do for example in
the case of gravity we had newtonian
gravity and we had einstein general
relativity we needed to craft an
experiment a way of distinguishing
between the predictions that these two
theories made and if one of them was
inconsistent with that theory we would
say that the observation has refuted
that theory while the other which is
consistent with the observation the
theory which is consistent with the
observation we say has so far gone
unrefuted and now remains our best
explanation of that given phenomena and
those explanations that we generate have
reach they solve the problem they were
created for in the first place and then
go on to do even more general relativity
fixes issues that newtonian gravity
could not solve but then it reaches into
things like the expanding universe and
the black holes and neutron stars and
the gps system things that no one
imagined two centuries ago under the
newtonian gravity framework my key
takeaway from this chapter is that
knowledge creation is a process of
guessing what is true and then
criticizing those guesses leading
gradually and ideally to the production
of good by which we mean hard to vary
explanations which cannot be derived
from our observations chapter two closer
to reality
knowledge brings us closer to
understanding reality
this idea of realism is the claim that
reality is out there and exists
independent of what we happen to think
about it but our knowledge what we come
to understand of that reality which is
beyond our minds as well as our minds
being a part of that reality our
knowledge of all of this can be
objective and should be objective and
that is objective in the sense that
no subjective noah needs to be involved
in order for the knowledge to actually
be knowledge knowledge can be recorded
in books or stored in computers it can
even appear in objects the computer on
which you are watching this is going to
instantiate relationships between the
circuits the knowledge of how to process
information and should all of humanity
be wiped out tomorrow but our artifacts
including our computers left behind and
an alien race found them then they could
reverse engineer what is going on in the
computer and therefore uncover the
knowledge that's in the computer by
decoding it and then they would know
what we know what has been stored in the
computers but how is it that knowledge
brings us closer to reality it's
interesting because sometimes in order
to come closer to the reality we need to
put multiple objects between us and that
reality for example returning to trying
to understand the nature of stars in
order to better understand what a star
is looking directly at it with an eye
that's unaided by any technology is not
going to bring you closer to the reality
of what that star is instead putting
between your eye a telescope and a
computer will certainly help in the
process of bringing you closer to
understanding the reality of stars
putting objects between you and that
star and not only the objects but also
existing explanations can bring you
closer to understanding reality as well
you can't see things directly because
observation is theory laden so when an
astronomer puts a telescope between
themselves and the star they have to
have an explanation first
of how the telescope works they have to
understand whether and to what extent
the telescope might be subtly changing
the color of the star whether there
might be artifacts on the lens and so
forth because after all once you produce
a picture of whatever the telescope is
taking using the computer you might very
well end up with something that's on the
printed page that is not actually out
there in outer space but it could just
be an error introduced by the telescope
or the computer processing of the image
this is the sense in which observation
is theory laden even something as simple
as straightforward looking relies upon a
complex process of how light gets
through the cornea of our eyes back to
the retina converted from chemical
energy into electrical energy and then
finally somehow or other translated by
our minds into information of a sort
this process of seeing is extremely
complicated but so long as we're
correcting errors then we do come closer
to the truth because this is what
knowledge growth really is it consists
of correcting errors and solving
problems errors in our existing theories
it's people who are the creative
entities that do the science and grow
explanatory knowledge people like thomas
edison and others have said over the
years that innovation is very much 99
perspiration and 1 innovation but in
fact that's not true the perspiration
phases of creativity can very much be
automated and increasingly are what's so
important now is imagination the
inspiration part that's all of what
science is about trying to find a
problem and fall in love with it as papa
says and then
attempting to find a solution unless of
course you find a better problem along
the way so the truth is that in science
it's almost all or ideally it should be
mainly creativity imagination my key
takeaway for this chapter is that
knowledge growth is about the
identification of errors in our existing
explanations and correcting them and
sometimes we need to put lots of things
like technology such as telescopes and
computers as well as other explanations
between us and those parts of reality
we're trying to understand in order to
come closer to explaining what's really
going on chapter three the spark
it is common these days for
intellectuals to embrace the so-called
principle of mediocrity that is the
claim that people are nothing special as
recently as 2021 the year in which i am
recording this the biggest paid podcast
on earth was called absolutely mental
and it featured sam harris in
conversation with the comedian ricky
gervais there have been two series so
far now certainly of course it was
mainly for entertainment and comedy
purposes but the subtext was whenever
they got into science and philosophy in
a serious sense it really was all about
the principle of mediocrity over and
again gervais made the claim and harris
if not explicitly at least tacitly
endorsed the notion that we are nothing
special we're humans there is a
continuum between bacteria through to
lower mammals and then to us we are just
an incremental increase on what went
before aren't dolphins and great apes so
smart look at us we're just so stupid
for polluting getting in wars and being
cruel to other creatures
but this is not merely black comedy it
informs academia as well sadly on this
view to some extent you're an
intellectual if you do denigrate people
only silly religious people think humans
are anything special so this principle
says we are nothing special and also the
cosmological principle says that the
earth planet earth is nothing
particularly special it's just a regular
planet orbiting a regular star in a
rather typical galaxy one among hundreds
of billions of them but set against all
of this is in the minds of many a
version of what is called spaceship
earth
well these days many people say there is
no planet b even when there are
literally many many planet bees that
have been discovered
kepler-452b
kepler-10b kepler-442b
take your pick there are even c's and
d's and so on anyways no planet b or
spaceship earth says in fact the earth
is a special place and nowhere else is
but all of this is wrong we humans are
special and earth is only special
because we are here we can make anywhere
hospitable the environment doesn't
support us it is barely suitable for us
as david says most places are
inhospitable even on the earth we make
the place hospitable and soon we will
make space hospitable we've already
begun only creative innovation allows
for us to support ourselves here because
the cosmos is dangerous and so is earth
enlightenment knowledge is the spark
that allows for unbounded progress off
into an infinite future this is
explanatory knowledge that allows for
the solving of human problems the only
other known type of knowledge in the
universe is biological slow incremental
guessing and checking of blind mutations
to see if there are any useful
adaptations so the spark is very much us
we people are the catalyst that takes
inert useless material and comes to
understand what it is made of
we create knowledge of it find out what
it is and only then it becomes useful an
actual resource
with this resource we can begin the
process of transforming our environment
into something hospitable
and our environment is the universe
eventually this ratcheting up of
knowledge creation allowing us to
transform physical reality around us
will stretch out beyond the earth
sparking knowledge creation throughout
the solar system and then the galaxy and
from there who knows where
the enlightenment has only just begun to
glow in an otherwise implacably dark and
hostile universe
eventually we can bring the rest of the
universe to life by making it hospitable
just as we have done here on a far
smaller scale this is merely the
beginning the kindling of infinite
progress my key takeaway from this
chapter is that the earth is a unique
place so far as we know in the universe
where an open-ended stream of knowledge
creation is occurring however it will
not remain this way as our enlightenment
traditions will spread to other planets
and stars and one day the rest of the
universe chapter 4 creation
has to be created
knowledge being useful information or
information that solves a problem
there are two kinds known the
information in the dna of an organism is
useful so it counts as knowledge it
solves the problem of survival for an
organism ideally but more precisely how
the gene can spread through a gene pool
and the problem of how to be copied
another feature which makes it knowledge
it appears via the process of evolution
by natural selection as explained
originally by darwin and which we now
know in a so-called neo-darwinian
framework as being about the selection
of units on the dna double helix called
genes
genes or groups of genes code for
structures in the physical structure of
an organism mutations of the dna are in
essence like guesses about what might
work in a given environment most are bad
guesses and only damage the organism
rarely some are mutations which are
advantageous and survive into the next
generation as they cause that organism
to be more fit in the given environment
they go on to be copied generation after
generation this all looks a little like
the growth of explanatory knowledge
where existing ideas can be changed
somewhat but most changes are not good
knowledge in the dna and in human minds
of the explanatory sort is hard to vary
small changes will ruin and not improve
the knowledge broadly speaking that both
ideas and genes can be copied and are
copied means they are replicators but
they do exist differences
explanations can be deliberately changed
intelligently designed if you like by
the free and conscious choices of people
who can see a problem and deliberate
over it and consider the best knowledge
available and imagine into existence new
ideas there is a genuine act of creation
on their part but there is no mind
behind the generation of biological
knowledge that is a blind process and
biological knowledge of that sort never
does much more than ensuring the
survival or not of a particular organism
or species while explanatory knowledge
has reach it solves the local problem a
scientist for example is interested in
only for it then to go on to solve
problems elsewhere at different times
the problem of what the structure of the
atom is eventually leads to uncovering
the cause of radioactivity and
eventually leads to the possibility of
generating electricity for hundreds of
millions perhaps even billions of people
using nuclear fission reactions
explanatory knowledge reaches into areas
creators of it can never quite imagine
initially evolution by natural selection
replaced lamarcism the idea that
biological knowledge can be acquired by
some sort of process of extrapolation
where giraffes next got longer because
they try to make their necks longer
similarly inductivism assumes that
explanatory knowledge is a process of
extrapolating from observations somehow
the knowledge in both cases
spontaneously appears out of trends
both lamarcism and induction are thus
wrong evolution by natural selection
solved an important problem that of the
problem of the appearance of design but
taking a look at the universe as a whole
the physical laws and the constants
there also have the appearance of design
it seems as though the laws have just
the right form and especially the right
parameters those parts of the theory
that need to be measured the constants
of nature like the gravitational
constant or the charge on an electron
for the universe to be bio-friendly but
the claim that cosmologically
fine-tuning is solved by a designer
suffers from the same flaw as it does in
biology we don't yet have an explanation
for the appearance of fine tuning but
this is only because we do not yet know
enough whatever the case we shouldn't be
leaping to it looks like design
therefore it is design so there must be
a designer that is exactly the same as
the error in biological creationism
before evolution by natural selection
was known
we cannot say why there is an appearance
of design in the physical laws but
postulating a cosmological multiverse or
a megaverse a multiverse of multiverses
where the other universes have different
laws doesn't solve the problem either in
truth this notion is rather too easy to
vary as it could account for any set of
laws including the ones we know to exist
in our universe my key takeaway from
this chapter is that both biological
organisms and the physical constants in
the universe that permit life have the
appearance of design but appearances can
be deceiving although darwin solved the
problem of why life appears to be
designed the question of why the
constants of nature seem to be designed
seem to be fine-tuned remains unsolved
chapter five the reality of abstractions
what happens from one moment to the next
in the physical universe is determined
by laws of physics acting on fundamental
particles
this description of reality
happens to explain very little
it is at best predictive but even then
in practice the prediction for large
ensembles of particles is intractable
and in principle there can be no
computer so powerful in our universe
that it could actually predict what
happens moment to moment precisely
because to know what happens next with
high precision requires knowing now with
high precision where all the particles
are and how fast they are moving but
there is no single now because of the
relativity of simultaneity what has this
to do with anything at all this
determinism is a form of reductionism
where it is assumed wrongly that
explanations at the lower level are
necessarily superior to explanations at
the emergent level but sometimes the
emergent explanation indeed mostly it's
the emergent explanation in day-to-day
life is the only known proper
explanation our go-to example here is
the parable of the copper atom as i've
come to call it it first appeared in the
fabric of reality and i've done a number
of podcasts on it including one devoted
exclusively to it but in short it goes
like this in parliament square in london
there stands a statue of winston
churchill it's made of bronze and at the
tip of the nose of the statue is a
copper atom why is that copper atom
there
the deterministic predictive explanation
goes like this matter was produced at
the big bang and some of that matter
eventually coalesced into stars and at
the core of those stars eventually
copper was fused during a supernova
explosion some of that copper ended up
forming the minerals on the earth which
were mined and under the action of the
forces of the laws of physics the copper
atom eventually ended up at the tip of
the nose of winston churchill now that
explanation works for anything anywhere
anytime it doesn't matter what the
object is it doesn't matter what the
particle is that you're talking about
beginning at the big bang following the
trajectories which are determined by the
laws of physics you will end up with the
particles being where they are right now
that's predictive it's not explanatory a
genuine explanation of what's going on
is the reason there's a copper atom at
the tip of the nose of winston churchill
statue is because we make statues out of
things like bronze and brass which
contain copper that helps them not
corrode away quite so quickly and the
reason the statue is there at all in the
first place is because winston churchill
helped defend
the west the enlightenment against
fascism and we like to build statues
honoring great leaders like that and so
that's why there is a copper atom at the
tip of the statue in parliament square
now this explanation involves things in
its full context of culture and choices
and war and things that do not reduce to
physical forces and fundamental
particles things like culture and the
choice to go to war involve abstractions
the reality of abstractions numbers and
not the numerals that represent them but
numbers are abstractions as well anyone
can go online and look up now on
wikipedia what the highest presently
known prime number is we happen to know
there is an infinite number of prime
numbers but at any given time we only
know of a particular highest prime
number now what is the next highest
prime number
we know it exists but we haven't found
it yet now in what sense does it exist
well it doesn't exist in physical
reality right now no one's found it it
hasn't actually been transcribed into a
computer anywhere it hasn't been printed
on sheets of paper it doesn't exist in
our physical universe but it exists it's
an abstraction and it can cause things
to actually happen
that prime number actually causes people
human beings to go out and search for it
so abstractions absolutely exist and can
have causal effects on what goes on in
physical reality and it is not reducible
just to the action of particles and
physical forces perhaps the most
controversial of all abstractions is
this idea of free will i regard free
will as an abstraction it is just the
capacity to choose and sometimes to
create knowledge to freely choose to
create knowledge which wasn't there
before but our minds also are
abstractions they are instantiated
presently in the neurons within our
brains but there is no reason in
principle that whatever is going on in
that brain could not be emulated
simulated in the silicon workings of a
computer which means whatever it is is
not identical to the firings of the
neurons in the brain my key takeaway
from this chapter is that non-physical
stuff or rather stuff that is
independent of its physical
instantiation in other words
abstractions can affect physical stuff
it is rarely the case that a description
of events in terms of physical
interactions is a complete explanation
we often need to invoke really existing
abstractions among the most important of
which are ideas chapter six the jump to
universality it is a jump to
universality that really makes the
difference between people by which we
mean
humans and the possibility of alien
intelligence and perhaps in the future
the possibility of artificial general
intelligence it's a jump to universality
that makes difference between these
kinds of people and all the other living
entities that are out there those
entities that cannot generate
explanatory knowledge we have a kind of
universality that is explanatory
universality but what is this thing
about a jump to universality well
firstly the first kind of universality
to have arisen that we know of seems to
have been the dna code it is a code
which cannot just make some limited
number of organisms but rather can
explore the space of all possible
carbon-based life it's a strange kind of
thing dna it can code for bacteria and
single-celled amoeba and simple life but
also fish and birds aquatic and air and
land of course mammals and so on and
some things in between like amphibians
and reptiles it can do insects and
dinosaurs and everything in between
those basically if it can be alive and
built from amino acids joining together
to form proteins allowing cells to hold
water in which i dissolve the chemicals
of life then dna seems to be able to
build it it's a universal code for life
human beings have created forms of
universality as well take ways of
communicating at first pictograms were
used pictures representing words this
system is not universal because if a new
word was invented then a whole new
picture was needed so the existing
system could never represent whatever
word or concept was needed when a
discovery was made but our present
various systems of alphabets for example
the english alphabet is universal words
might get longer or in some cases
shorter but it's not like we're going to
run out of letters or words and number
systems like roman numerals are
cumbersome and not so easy to use to
represent large numbers or do complex
arithmetic efficiently but the modern
indian arabic system of 0 to 9 is
universal it's easy to represent
whatever number you like and perform
with relative ease calculations in that
system the numbers zero through to nine
represent any number simply by changing
the position of the number nine units
nine tens nine trillions and so on all
with a single digit and then add a few
zeros it's universal the most important
example in technology of universality is
the computer the turing machine a device
able to do the work of any other device
that computed stuff was his invention
including the human mind by the way
could do the work of that too so in
principle the universal computer the
universal turing machine could be
programmed with intelligence and then
david deutsch made a further jump to
universality with the notion of a
quantum computer a computer that took
advantage of the actual known laws of
physics the quantum laws of physics to
allow for quantum computation a far more
efficient way of calculating certain
things importantly things like quantum
systems which meant that all physical
systems could be efficiently simulated
by this computer provably that includes
human brains it's not a metaphor that
the human brain is a computer it is the
literal truth of the matter given the
known laws of physics all of these
computers quantum or classical rely on
error correction making them digital
devices the common feature of all these
kinds of universality is that they exist
in digital systems but the most
important jump to universality in the
universe is us the jump to explanatory
universality even if other animals can
think and i'm not sure that they can but
if they can it is about a fixed range of
things whatever is encoded in their
genes but humans being people are
universal in their capacity to explain
the world
this gives us a special relationship
with the laws of physics
because what it is in here going on in
our minds comes to resemble what is out
there over time with increasing fidelity
my key takeaway from this chapter is
that many systems gradually improve over
time but sometimes some systems reach a
point where there is a sudden increase
in capacity such that the system is now
able to do everything in some class of
tasks for example although pre-humans
might have been able to explain
something about reality people today can
explain everything that is explicable
chapter seven
artificial creativity
what is called artificial intelligence
is really just an incremental
improvement on the kinds of tasks
computers have always done calculating
extrapolating and doing very little that
is surprising a program that is created
to learn to play computer games does
exactly that it does not tend to stop
and decide to write a poem on a word
processor
computers presently do precisely as they
are programmed to do they do not disobey
but people disobey creativity requires
disobedience to go against what was
known or acceptable before what this
tells us is that the programs running on
these computers do not create anything
new
only the programmers do a computer that
beats a chess grandmaster is impressive
but it is impressive because of raw
power and clever programming it is not
creating new knowledge it is literally
calculating among known possibilities it
is not having fun and it is not ever
able to do anything else other than that
one thing even a computer programmed
with a wide repertoire of abilities is
not approaching universality of the
explanatory kind universality of that
kind actual creativity actual artificial
general intelligence intelligence like
ours
has no fixed repertoire we
can invent new tasks unlike a computer
we have
problem situations likewise evolutionary
algorithms are not examples of actual
evolution being simulated either a phd
student who designs a robot with legs or
even just simulates one which then goes
on to learn to walk through trial and
error has been given a fixed task learn
to walk
and it has a criteria for learning to
walk so it is unsurprising that it
manages to achieve this modest task
eventually but if it then begins to
dance a waltz without ever being
programmed
that would be a truly impressive display
of evolution and if it ever then went on
to invent beautiful new dances no one
had ever seen before then we should all
think we are in the presence of an
actual artificial intelligence an agi a
person until then all we have are dumb
computers
impressive a tesla car is impressive but
it's not intelligent
when a programmer writes a so-called
evolutionary algorithm the thing is they
are putting their explanatory knowledge
into the code and some of that knowledge
has reach what this means is that the
knowledge itself ends up being able to
solve problems the programmer might not
have thought of
but this does not mean the code or the
knowledge on certainly not the robot is
actually thinking of those problems it
just means that the problem is
encountered and the code was already a
solution for that problem there's a
thought experiment in this chapter which
basically goes
a true evolutionary algorithm if it is
to replicate evolution by natural
selection which recall is an iterative
process of random mutations the random
being important here anyways an actual
evolutionary algorithm would not begin
with the knowledge of the programmer it
would begin with almost no knowledge so
if we took say a robot that could walk
replace its program by a sequence of
random numbers and then have a random
number generator introduce more random
numbers each time the program is run and
you keep the same criteria in the
program for succeeding as in any usual
evolutionary algorithm if after some
years of doing this the robot ends up
walking at all then we've refuted the
idea that in those other programs it was
all just the programmers knowledge
achieving the task after all and not
evolution evolution is after all blind
and the mutations are random this
thought experiment also points to the
fact we do not understand how actual
evolution by natural selection works in
very fine detail either we know there
has been a ramping up of complexity in
some species over time we cannot say
precisely why because our existing
understanding of the theory says that
evolution is blind and as always the
maxim if you can't program it you
haven't understood it holds in both
cases evolutionary creativity and
explanatory creativity we do not
understand how to program a computer to
simulate either of them
which would be to actually create a
version of either and at least in part
this is because we did not understand
how universality in either of these
cases is operating and represented in
the dna or the human mind respectively
my key takeaway from this chapter is if
you can't program it you haven't
understood it and we can program neither
the ability to simulate the creation of
biological knowledge nor of explanatory
knowledge using our computers indeed
first we're going to need algorithms for
both to be constructed before we can
begin to think about actually writing
some code chapter 8 a window on infinity
mathematical infinities can produce some
seeming paradoxes
david hilbert imagined an infinity hotel
to push our intuitions about infinity
around
if you consider a hotel with an infinite
number of rooms and all of them are full
then you might think that well if
they're all full there's no room for
more patrons
but let's think a little more carefully
unlike with a regular finite hotel if
infinity hotel is full it doesn't
actually mean there's no more room
for example if another guest does arrive
all the management need to do is to
announce via the pa system that everyone
should move to the next highest numbered
room so the person in room one moves to
room two the person in room two moves to
room three and so on that would leave
room number one unoccupied there is no
last room so it's not a problem what
actually goes on there however
infinity hotel can be overwhelmed this
is because
room numbering in infinity hotel
consists of
countable room numbers you can literally
count them one two three four and so on
but some infinities are uncountable it
was georg cantor who proved using a
diagonal argument how some infinities
are larger than others the way a
diagonal argument works is this imagine
the rooms at infinity hotel were
assigned
one of the decimal numbers between 0 and
1 there are clearly an infinite number
of those
would we be able to assign one decimal
number identically to one of the hotel
rooms imagine we did this at random so
room one got assigned to the number zero
point five
six
and that goes on forever that ellipse
there the three dots means the number
continues without end imagine room 2 is
0.542 imagine room 3 is
0.971
four is
0.509 and you keep on doing this for all
the rooms in the hotel
would any decimals be left over would
some ever go unassigned
what about this number let's construct
it by
differing from the number assigned to
room number one by the first digit so
instead of it being
0.5 let's take the 5 and we'll change it
to a 6 but you could pick any number
that you like so so far we've got 0.6
and let's say it differs from the second
number by the second digit in some way
so instead of
0.54 so instead of the 4 in that second
place we will take that and change it
into a 2 arbitrarily and in the third
number we take the third digit and we
change that and so on for all of the
numbers assigned to the rooms of the
hotel by the end of this process you
will have constructed a number
different from any of the numbers
assigned to any of the rooms in the
hotel and so there would be a decimal
number that appears between zero and one
that is unassigned to any room in the
hotel by definition this is a diagonal
argument and you've produced there a
proof of an uncountable infinity a kind
of infinity that includes numbers not in
the infinite sequence that you might
otherwise think contains all the
possible numbers and the curious thing
is about counting integers is that no
matter where you start you're always
unusually close to the beginning because
you're always infinitely far from the
end there is no end after all you're
infinitely far from infinity and in
physical reality we like to say we're
here at the beginning of infinity and
we'll always be at the beginning of
infinity and unusually close to it
that's what infinity just happens to be
like we live in a multiverse where we
actually can't count the universes there
might be uncountably infinite numbers of
universes and therefore copies of each
of us that differentiate into infinitely
many copies over time and we as the
knowledge creators in physical reality
only know something of whether a thing
is true or false because the laws of
physics allow us to do the knowing the
proving or the calculating or explaining
that is possible to do given the
physical brains that we have it is
therefore physics that underpins what it
is possible for us to claim to know
including claim to prove in mathematics
that some mathematical theorem is true
or false maybe independent of physics
but our fallible human knowledge of that
theorem is not independent of physics
but bound by it after all our brains are
physical objects proof and explanation
are physical processes my key takeaway
from this chapter is that we are always
at the beginning of infinity so we are
still unusually primitive compared to
people of the distant future we are thus
lucky compared to our ancestors but
terribly unlucky compared to our
descendants
chapter 9 optimism all evils are caused
by insufficient knowledge this is what
david deutsch has called the principle
of optimism
to some extent it is a special case of
problems are soluble unless there is a
physical law preventing us from solving
the problem then the problem can be
solved by creating the knowledge needed
to solve that problem among all the
categories of different problems that
exist evil is one kind not all problems
cause suffering or evil only some do
some problems are fun and lead to no
harm at all the problem of how to
improve the cgi in a movie is not an
evil but it's a soluble problem and fun
for some to try and figure out a
solution to but problems which do cause
suffering evils are due to our not
knowing how to fix that problem
yes serial killers are an evil but so
are earthquakes and cyclones if we knew
how to prevent all murder we would do so
but we don't know how and the same is
true of any other natural disaster and
people do evil things because they don't
know better morally they do not know
what the right thing is even if they
claim they do know what the right thing
is and choose to do otherwise this is
still an example of a lack of knowledge
a lack of actual moral knowledge which
would have directed their behavior
towards something better something they
should have done in morality as in
physics or mathematics it is possible to
make objective progress with morality
considered as that domain concerned with
what to do or what to do next or what
you should do there is something
objectively better and something
objectively worse in the choices before
you and in the limit there must be
something like an optimal choice to make
given the values of any particular
person and those values are themselves
claims about what is right and they
could possibly be wrong and so they can
be improved all of this means that in
morality as in physics it is possible to
be wrong and because there is something
to be objectively wrong about there are
true and false claims we can make in
these areas what we need to do
everywhere is to seek out good
explanations as there will never come a
time where in any domain our knowledge
is anything like complete there can be
no end of science and no end of progress
fallablism is the claim that we might be
wrong about something and this is an
optimistic way of viewing the world
because the capacity to be wrong means
the capacity to error correct and hence
the possibility of making objective
progress and that is always our
circumstance at the level of society we
want an open and dynamic society one
that has a tradition of criticism a
tradition of criticism means we take
nothing for granted and attempt to
objectively improve our best
explanations over time by incremental
means the key thing here is error
correction identifying areas where we
can find them and conjecturing ways to
correct those errors what is important
for our civilization is to continue to
preserve the means of error correction
our society the civilization that
continues the enlightenment tradition
has been especially long-lived and
uniquely long-lived in fact preserving
error correction means preserving our
civilization because that means
preserving progress and problem-solving
for almost all of geological history on
this planet whenever an asteroid was on
a collision course with earth it struck
this planet
for the first time ever our planet is in
the unique position in the universe so
far as we know where asteroids will be
repelled by a planet our planet in the
form of our technology created through
our knowledgeable use of resources
so whenever anyone says that the chance
of civilization being destroyed by an
asteroid is one in ten thousand in the
next 100 years what they mean is
completely absent human knowledge and
choices we cannot prophesy the future
with any reliability because we cannot
predict what people will choose to do in
the future
and especially we cannot predict what
knowledge they will have created
this is as true for climate change and
viruses as it is for asteroids it is
never a matter of probability
but knowledge
problems are soluble
my key takeaway from this chapter is
that all evils are due to a lack of
knowledge if we continue to create the
wealth needed to fund the solutions to
solve our problems we'll be in the best
position to prepare for the unknown
problems of tomorrow chapter 10 a dream
of socrates in this chapter david
explains epistemology what knowledge is
and how we create it through a dialogue
largely between the god hermes and
socrates in this chapter we find that
all knowledge is conjectural it is
guests
but that doesn't stop it from being
objective it tracks reality and is
independent of what anyone believes to
be true about that knowledge and so
knowledge is not what the ancients say a
form of justified true belief after all
the standard of justifying as true is
impossibly higher to begin with and as
for believing knowledge well there are
many instances where not only would this
not be desired it would be absurd it
would be wrong to believe as true or
flat earth but constructing the concrete
base of your home on the assumption that
the ground there is ideally flat is a
reasonable one but you don't need to
believe that i also don't need to
believe newton's law of gravity i know
it it's part of my knowledge but there's
no possible way i can justify it to be
true indeed i know it to be false yet it
is knowledge it solves a problem we
cannot see what is before our eyes that
we can or that we should endorse the
claim that seeing as believing ignores
most of what is interesting in science
and elsewhere i cannot see the atoms
before my eyes i cannot see the oxygen
in the air that i breathe yet i know
about atoms and i know about oxygen
knowledge is not primarily about the
information our senses provide us with
in fact it is more about correcting the
errors in the misconceptions our senses
naively lead us into our senses lead us
astray all the time indeed our thinking
can and anything therefore can be
doubted just because we cannot think of
a misconception right now about a piece
of knowledge that we have does not mean
that piece of knowledge is once and for
all finally true it may just mean we
have a lack of imagination consider the
claim that through any two points a
unique straight line can be drawn
this is not actually true look into that
a little perhaps here whatever the case
it might be that there is just one
central moral maxim that is the moral
maxim that brings morality to some
extent within the sphere of epistemology
the one thing we should never do we
should never destroy the means of error
correction this idea of should that's a
moral claim this idea of error
correction that's epistemology and
further our latest understanding coming
from constructor theory is we might also
say that what is possible to error
correct and ultimately how physically to
correct an error is a matter of physics
and this is pure speculation on my part
but in a distant future might there be a
physics of morality what i am not trying
to say is that we will ever be able to
determine by some calculation what to do
morally but what i do mean is that
perhaps physics itself will place limits
upon us morally even if it cannot tell
us what to do it will say perhaps what
is impossible amongst all of our shoulds
but this is beyond the scope of this
chapter so i'm cheating a little bit the
chapter here also contains a perspective
on the so-called socratic problem the
problem of what socrates the philosopher
really said or thought what we know of
socrates comes to us filtered through
the writings of plato and while socrates
seems in some moods to be a fallibilist
plato wasn't plato was a genius of
course but also all sorts of wrong on
epistemology and political philosophy
and morality and mathematics and so on
so it may be that he simply
misunderstood socrates his teacher
misunderstanding is the natural state of
affairs of course as popper admonished
it is impossible to speak in such a way
as to not be misunderstood in this
chapter david also makes some remarks
about the nature of philosophy compared
to other academic disciplines
in philosophy as it appears in
universities there's rather a lot of
attention paid to the history of
philosophy what this or that ancient or
classical philosopher actually said or
meant
it should perhaps be more like physics
or chemistry or science broadly where we
almost never consult the original source
of some idea or theory instead we just
take the idea itself for granted and
then make some progress my key takeaway
from this chapter is that knowledge is
not derived from the senses it is we
people who create it in our minds by a
process of guesswork we guess what is
true and criticize those guesses in the
light of our observations and other
kinds of refutation the purpose of
observation is to decide between
theories already guessed
chapter 11 the multiverse
the experiment in quantum theory can
only be properly explained by recourse
to a physical reality that is
stupendously larger than the one we
observe
this continues that tradition in science
that the size of the reality we inhabit
seems to only ever be going in one
direction getting bigger and bigger to
include more and more stuff that we
don't ever hope to directly observe to
explain the motion of particles we do
see in our universe we need to invoke
the existence of entities we do not see
these other entities are behaving like
fundamental particles which means they
are fundamental particles because they
affect the fundamental particles we can
see this stupendously large ensemble of
entities
beyond what we can see we call the
multiverse there are many experiments
that are used to illustrate this reality
one is known as the mark zender
interferometer here
two half silvered mirrors are placed
with two regular mirrors the half
silvered mirrors allow photons particles
of light to either go through be
transmitted or bounce off be reflected
at the first mirror we cannot predict in
our universe whether a given photon will
be transmitted or reflected we can only
say that it's got a 50 chance of either
at the second half silvered mirror at
the end of the experiment what happens
is that the photon is always detected at
the arrow that says photon out and never
at the nothing out arrow but why why
isn't it 50 50 here as well as it was in
the first mirror the reason is that in
truth at the first mirror what happens
is that the photon that interacts with
that mirror is a multiversal object that
means it occupies many universes we are
in one universe or one group of
universes so can only detect it either
going along x or y
even though in truth it does go along
both
we know this is true because only if
that photon takes both paths the one we
see and the one we do not see can we
explain how the two photons interfere at
the second mirror and recombine there
causing it to always go in only one of
those directions rather than both this
is the only explanation something is
interfering with the photon at the
second mirror and that something is its
counterpart in the other universe if we
did not live in a multiverse if our
universe did not consist of many things
that we do not observe we should expect
a 50 50 split as at the first mirror
what is happening at that first mirror
is that the photon differentiates into
two groups and thus so do the universes
and the observers in those universes
this is going on all the time all
objects we can see are multiversal
objects they exist in the universe we
observe and many others we do not
sometimes with slight or even very great
variations and the truth is deeper still
what we observe is a universe but it is
a universe of objects that have fungible
instances perfectly identical instances
in the same place at the same time that
occupy different universes so they are
different in that sense because they
could potentially partition themselves
into universes which cease to be
fungible the theory of quantum
computation requires that a multiverse
exists because it is otherwise
impossible to explain what quantum
computers are in principle and one day
will be in practice capable of doing
namely a quantum computer would be able
to perform calculations that a computer
even the size of our entire universe
could not possibly do and it can only do
this because it the quantum computer can
take advantage of computing power
in other universes using interference we
cannot explain how a quantum computer
does what it does in retrospect by
appealing to a single classical history
we have to invoke once more the
existence of histories we observers did
not occupy this again is testament to
physical reality being more than just a
single classical universe and as
unpalatable as it might be to some
people this means we're in a multiverse
many semi-parallel at times barely
interacting and sometimes not
interacting universes a person on this
view in the multiverse is a channel of
information flow along which knowledge
grows this is unique in the universe and
this knowledge may turn out to be among
some of the longest persisting
structures in the multiverse for more on
all of this see my now seven part and
indeed more than seven hours series on
the multiverse right here and see also
this the nexus video for more on what
the philosophy of people and the
philosophy of self might be in the
multiverse my key takeaway here
is that the physical universe is
stupendously larger than what we can
ever hope to observe
we call the approximately autonomous
regions closed off from us other
universes and together with our own
universe we call the entire ensemble the
multiverse
chapter 12
a physicist's history
of bad philosophy a reason why the
everett or quantum multiverse is not
more widely known taught or even taken
seriously by actual practicing quantum
physicists
is bad philosophy there was a retreat
into some sort of relativism and
instrumentalism by physicists in the
early 20th century instrumentalism is a
fancy word for this idea of shut up and
calculate it is the idea that science
properly considered is simply about
being able to predict the outcome of
experiments
rather than actually understand and
hence be able to explain what is really
going on in reality anyways this chapter
is about how the equations of quantum
theory describe particles as seeming to
be in multiple places simultaneously and
having multiple velocities
simultaneously so to take the theory and
the formalism literally as a description
of reality particles do have those
properties
however when you go to observe any
single particle we find it in a single
place so how do we square this the
theory is saying one thing the particle
has multiple positions at the same time
and our observation the particle only
has one position at a time well if
you're a physicist struggling to
understand all this in the early 20th
century you might well throw your hands
up in the air and say all the
possibilities except for the one we
observe collapse or disappear upon the
act of observation
this seems to put the observer the act
of observation right in the center of
fundamental physics observation is doing
something fundamental to the physical
theory and that has led to all sorts of
nonsense claims ever since being made
about quantum theory bringing in
consciousness and mind to the quantum
realm this idea that observation
destroys all the positions a particle
was occupying except for one is known as
the measurement problem
how it actually happens no one could say
and people gave up for a time trying to
really find out they just accepted it
all of this was at least in large part
motivated by bad philosophy
this is philosophy that's not merely
false but it actively prevents the
growth of knowledge
the idea that science should only be
about predicting the outcome of
experiments acts to prevent us from
improving actual explanations of reality
after all it rules out explanation as
even being a part of science in the
first place but bad philosophy has not
only affected physics it's also infected
some other sciences or what should be
sciences like psychology behaviorism in
psychology is instrumentalism as applied
to that subject and says that because we
cannot directly observe minds we can
only observe human behavior and trends
in human behavior then this serves as a
proxy for understanding why people do
what they do this denies over having
good explanations of the human mind
consider that an antidepressant may make
a person objectively happier or it may
simply lower their standards for what
they think of as happiness presently
there is no good explanation and no
experiment that can distinguish these
two possibilities happiness could be a
state of continually solving your
problems and when you are constantly
thwarted in solving your problems then
your happiness turns to unhappiness but
behaviorism looks at behaviours
including people self-reporting that's a
behavior talking that indicate more or
less happiness without ever wondering
what the causal link between what is
actually going on in the mind in terms
of thoughts and ideas and what causes
behaviors we call this
explanationless science it might all
look like real science is going on
experiments might be done papers written
graphs with trend lines produced but if
we cannot ever say why
something or other constitutes happiness
in the first place if we do not have an
explanation of what a particular mental
state is at the level of ideas in the
mind then we cannot hope to maximize it
let alone treat deficiencies of it bad
philosophy continues through to today
relativism is a form of bad philosophy
that denies the possibility of objective
knowledge and objective truth it really
took off soon after wittgenstein
published his major works wittgenstein
thought most of philosophy reduced to
puzzles and it was all just about
language that people were using rather
than actual philosophical problems
wittenstein is still extremely popular
today many people think that philosophy
is just about argumentation rather than
solving particular philosophical
problems reducing every single problem
to nothing but a puzzling language is
quite a dangerous route to go down and
it breeds a form of relativism which we
inherit today in certain kinds of wokism
my key idea from this chapter is that
instrumentalism is the idea that the
purpose of science is to predict the
outcome of experiments this constitutes
a kind of bad philosophy which we define
as philosophy which actively prevents
the growth of knowledge by denying
reality or truth or the possibility of
finding good explanations chapter 13
choices when people have a choice before
them
it is often not a case that pure logic
and therefore any mathematical process
of objectively weighing options is going
to lead them to the best choice instead
what people actually do both
individually and even when acting as
part of a group is to creatively
conjecture new options no one had on the
table before so it cannot be a process
of weighing existing options because the
existing options can always be changed
social choice theory is an attempt to
turn decision making by people into a
purely logical exercise to make it
perfectly rational the motivation i
suppose was a noble one take out the
messy emotions and subjective feelings
from the issue and look simply at the
facts and apply some rigorous rational
mathematical framework to the situation
and see which choice is actually
calculated to be best the problem with
this is that all such schemes for trying
to turn decision-making into a branch of
mathematics encounters what are known as
no-go theorems paradoxes and things that
are simply illogical one of the most
famous of these discussed in the book is
known as arrows theorem this theorem is
about how a group might come to a
consensus arrow begins with a set of
axioms that any such group would want to
adhere to if they're going to make a
rational choice these uncontroversial
axioms the starting points would be
things like well if a group is going to
be unanimous on a particular decision
then that decision should be whatever
the unanimous vote happens to be
logical
another axiom is called the no dictator
axiom one person cannot be said to
represent the whole group unless
everyone already agrees and consult the
book for the others or look up arrows
theorem these axioms are completely
uncontroversial you'd want to be able to
agree with them here's the problem what
arrow showed is that the uncontroversial
axioms despite being perfectly
reasonable are also inconsistent
logically with one another in other
words they cannot all be satisfied
simultaneously this is a deep problem a
fatal blow to the idea that decision
making can always be a perfectly logical
exercise so what do we do do we just
give up on logic no
what we do in these cases whether
individually or as a group is to create
new options and have a good explanation
either for some existing option or the
new one we then choose among our options
by choosing among the explanations and
criticizing and hence refuting the other
options this is actually how decision
making works it's not a process of
weighing but criticizing truly objective
decision making more resembles objective
science we have some theories or
policies at the level of society and we
seek to refute all of them except for
one ideally and that one that goes
unrefuted that survives the critical
process that's the one we accept as our
best explanation or is our best policy
or if none of them happen to be
satisfactory what do we do we use our
creativity as people to invent a better
theory or policy democracies are systems
of government for making decisions
but the quality of a democracy is to be
judged not by whether the best ruler is
installed and to what extent this is
isomorphic with the era that science is
about finding the once and for all true
theory instead what democracy is is a
system for removing rulers and policies
easily without violence that is the
standard by which we judge democracy and
its institutions broadly this also means
that the plurality voting system is the
best system of voting because it means a
ruler can be more easily removed if
they're a bad ruler this is unlike in
any preferential voting system where
that bad ruler can form a coalition and
get preferences to keep themselves in
power the more parties there are the
more coalitions can form and this means
deals are done to keep themselves in
power even when the voters no longer
want those elected officials in office
politicians like preferential voting
systems for this reason and on this
point compromise has an undeservedly
good reputation what a compromise is is
a theory or a policy
that wasn't anyone's first choice in the
first place so when it fails as
inevitably it often will
everyone involved in the compromise can
turn around and say well that's not what
i ever wanted anyway and therefore no
one actually learns anything when the
compromise fails my key takeaway from
this chapter is that making a choice is
about choosing the best explanation when
there are options before you the only
rational thing to do is to criticize
them in the hope that all but one of
them are refuted if none are
satisfactory then we use our creativity
to come up with a better option
and unless there's a threat of violence
don't compromise chapter 14
why are flowers beautiful aesthetics art
music and beauty are all domains of
objective knowledge
yes people have subjective preferences
no one denies this but this is not to
say that there is no such thing as one
particular thing in truth in reality
actually being more beautiful than
another there are objective differences
not merely between noise and music but
between music of different epochs the
proverbial cave people banging on drums
and modern music today or cave art and
modern 3d computer generated art cave
people would have liked to know how to
paint better and there really is a
better they would like to have made
objective progress in their art in
storytelling the waste paper basket as
we like to say of the musician and the
composer fills up over time because they
are trying to reach an objective
standard trying to make something sound
better and not merely to them but to
everyone and in actual truth some sounds
simply are more harmonious more
beautiful than other combinations of
sounds the fact that today we cannot
rank order all musicians that have ever
existed
from worst to best in a way that
everyone would agree with does not mean
there are no objective standards it just
means that we don't know much about
those objective standards yet and those
standards are sometimes swamped by yes
the subjective taste of people but the
existence of subjective taste does not
rule out the existence of real objective
standards in music and elsewhere in art
and aesthetics beauty if we think of it
as attractiveness is something humans
have tried to produce and surround
themselves with since time immemorial an
art piece is objectively beautiful
because people are attracted to it by
the measure that people return to it
over and over again in the gallery not
all of what is called art does this some
art rejects the notion of beauty
altogether and exists rather to provoke
or make a political point but again this
rejection of beauty is likewise no proof
that objective beauty and the capacity
for something to be more or less
attractive does not exist the existence
of creationism doesn't show that there's
a problem with evolution by natural
selection likewise the museum of modern
art with its duchamp urinals doesn't
prove that the classical art gallery
does not contain objectively better art
flowers are attractive insects are
attracted to flowers but so are people
whatever it is that flowers are doing
and creating beauty in nature it acts to
attract both insects and people
something needs to be explained here
there must be some objective standard of
beauty operating even if we cannot in
fine detail say exactly what it is but
it seems to be the case that flowers are
beautiful because they needed a way to
signal across diverse species insects
co-evolved with flowers and so the
flowers evolved to be beautiful and we
humans seek out objective beauty also so
we find flowers beautiful because they
are actually in reality beautiful it's
not just our opinion evolution designed
them that way to attract insects people
enjoy objective beauty because we are
trying to signal across the wide gap
between us and other humans
between one human person and another
there is a vast gap in preferences and
knowledge and more besides the
differences between one person and
another are like the differences between
species so if we are to signal to one
another what we like we will learn to
appreciate objective beauty too and so
we will create things more and more
beautiful this signaling to one another
and attracting one another to our
creative output is what we're all about
the best way to do this is by finding
those objective standards of beauty
justice flowers did my key takeaway from
this chapter there is a parochial kind
of beauty we've all got our own tastes
and preferences yes but there are also
objective standards for beauty some of
which have evolved in flowers and many
of which we have only just begun to
discover through our creative and
artistic endeavors chapter 15 the
evolution of culture this chapter
contains some really new and deep
insights about memes the concept of a
meme was invented by richard dawkins and
is the abstract analog of a gene in
other words it's a replicator of a kind
it contains knowledge certainly
information and can be combined in
complex ways to direct behavior moreover
memes evolve in short memes are a kind
of idea a kind of idea that persists but
may also change gradually over time
cultures consist of many memes and
deutsche's deep insight in this chapter
is that there are important differences
between cultures in terms of their memes
deutsche refines this notion to be about
dynamic and static societies why is it
that so many societies have gone extinct
especially given that the brains of
people in the past were anatomically
almost indistinguishable from the ones
we have today they those primitive
people had the capacity to be creative
so why weren't they
well because they used their creativity
to keep things the same something that
i'll return to in the next chapter ideas
that people have which tend to keep a
society the same or in other words
actively prevent the growth of knowledge
are called
anti-rational memes
these are not merely irrational ideas
which might be thought of as bad ideas
but rather anti-rational memes are the
ones which say you may not criticize
this thing they disable the person's
critical faculties so you can imagine
all sorts of evil notions like those
that say if you do raise an objection to
anything in this holy book you can be
put to death
this acts to prevent anyone from
criticizing the holy book and in time it
stops them even being able to think of
criticisms it is an anti-rational meme
and it can get replicated as parents
teach their children that and their
children teach their children and so on
but a rational name is one which relies
on a person's critical faculties to get
itself replicated in the first place a
person tries to criticize the idea but
fails to find any valid criticism and so
they pass it on because they think
that's a good idea implicitly they think
i couldn't refute it so i'm going to
regard this as part of my knowledge and
i'm going to spread it out into the
world
theories in science are like this so are
musical tunes and jokes the underlying
idea gets passed on even if it's not
verbatim a culture is a set of ideas or
memes that cause the people in that
culture to behave in more or less
similar ways but there is an important
way to distinguish between two extreme
kinds of society the two extremes are a
static society this is the one that is
ruled by anti-rational memes for the
most part in such a society centuries
and millennia can pass and almost
nothing changes but a dynamic society a
society like ours is ruled by rational
names where the anti-rational means have
not quite been eliminated but minimized
to a large extent it is one where the
thing that stays the same is change the
enlightenment is the longest surviving
example of a society where it is dynamic
because there exists this overarching
anti-anti-rational meme
a rational meme in other words but a
special kind of rational name that
guards against the anti-rational kind
and that meme is the traditions of
criticism or the tradition of criticism
if you like the underlying idea of which
is this it's all up for grabs and you
can criticize anything free speech and
institutions protecting free speech and
more besides to protect the means of
progress now there is no perfect example
of either a static society something
that really doesn't change at all over
time even the neo-static societies do
change but very very gradually and even
our culture is not a perfect example of
a dynamic society there are threats even
now that slow down progress the creeping
wokeism and so on and kinds of political
correctness that cause people to not
criticize ideas for fear of offending
someone or suffering legal action but in
the main our society is a very robust
and good example of a dynamic society we
are the best society to have ever
existed primitive societies were
unimaginably bad we are always at the
beginning of infinity so even our
society is transitioning and because of
creativity which is error-prone we will
always be transitioning to something
even more dynamic my key takeaway from
this chapter
dynamic societies like ours value
criticism and protect our ability to
correct errors in our ideas through the
propagation of rational means this
stands in stark contrast to static
societies where anti-rational means have
taken hold disable their holders
critical faculties and make people
reluctant to criticize and therefore
improve existing ideas in the culture
chapter 16
the evolution of creativity humans are
creative entities our defining feature
is that we can create explanatory
knowledge any other people in the
universe be they aliens or artificial
general intelligence will be able to
explain their environment so why is it
then that for most of human history most
humans living in primitive societies
failed to do much good explaining hence
why did they fail to make much progress
the enlightenment began around 1700 or
maybe a little bit before and the
industrial revolution began to happen
just a little bit later than that
but why did neither of these things
happen a thousand or even 10 000 years
earlier if people had the same capacity
for thinking and creativity as the
people then did and the people today
have
the answer is that the creativity they
did have was being used to keep things
static the same and unchanging in a
static society the way to stand out as a
good person and get a mate or get
respect or gain authority and so on
would be to enact the means of that
society the culture ever more strictly
to be especially static in your outlook
to be especially obedient and uncreative
the replication of a meme takes
creativity it cannot be copied directly
because we do not have direct access to
each other's minds and what we do when
we copy a meme or rather replicate it is
to replicate its meaning that's the
whole content of a meme it's meaning
some thinkers on the topic for example
the wonderful susan blackmore who has
popularized the field of memetics as
much as anyone has suggested meme
replication occurs by imitation but
david deutsch explains that this is not
possible because we do not have direct
access to the memes the ideas in
people's minds or brains in order to do
this instead what actually happens is we
observe behavior and we don't directly
copy that either it certainly looks as
if we are copying but it can't be that
after all let's imagine a simple example
a child learning to wave back at someone
if it was all about copying that
behavior would that mean going to stand
where the other person is and wave from
that exact location back towards where
the child was previously standing would
it mean the child getting a stool and
standing on it so their hand is the same
height as the person waving at them
would it mean putting a little bit of
artificial hair on their arms so their
arm was being copied somewhat more
faithfully from the adult what exactly
is being copied or imitated in this
situation well david relates the story
of how poppa would begin his lectures on
the philosophy of science with one word
he'd say to the students observe and
then just wait
eventually one of them would ask what
they were supposed to be observing
well exactly you need a theory first of
what to observe and how before you can
begin observing
this was perhaps one of poppa's deepest
insights observation is theory laden and
so when we are trying to replicate a
meme we have to come at that situation
with a theory to begin with david
imports this whole notion into the field
of mimetics it cannot be straightforward
imitation of behavior or copying no
rather the child or anyone else seeking
to uncover what someone else is thinking
to replicate their memes so to speak has
to guess what is true and wait for
feedback from the world a child might
very well upon being waved at run over
towards a person and need to be
corrected at some point by a parent who
helps them learn now you don't need to
run over there when someone waves at you
you can just stand here and move your
hand or something like that anyway the
child guesses what is correct and
eventually they get it apes and parrots
can open parrots but they cannot
construct knowledge like humans can
although they've got memes the
repertoire of their memes is fixed by
their genes but their brains are
sufficiently evolved so that they can
change the sequence of the memes that
are fixed in many different ways it's
rather like they've got a hundred pieces
of a puzzle which can be arranged in
perhaps thousands of different ways to
do different things so from the outside
it kind of looks a little like they're
creating knowledge however the
repertoire is fixed the number of
possible combinations is fixed this
explanation for how lower animals like
apes imitate behaviors like sound and
even sign language it's called behaviour
passing so it kind of looks like what
we're doing our thinking our creativity
it was discovered by the animal
behaviour theorist richard byrne and it
requires no actual creativity on the
part of the ape or the parrot of the
explanatory type but
humans are different we invent new
puzzle pieces all the time and so our
repertoire of possible behaviours is
unbounded it is not fixed by genetics we
flew that coupe long ago now most
evolution goes on outside the genes
genetic evolution was just a prelude
most of the rest of the history of
evolution in our universe will be about
the evolution of memes my key takeaway
from this chapter
is that
for most of human history people were
using their creativity in order to
simply keep things the same and they
were doing this because the way to be
more accepted in a static society is to
be more conformist to be more obedient
but in a dynamic society the way to
stand out is to innovate and to be
creative chapter 17 unsustainable static
societies reveal an important truth if
criticism is not valued by a society it
will go extinct the parable of the
easter islanders is salient here they
built great monuments for no more
purpose than appeasing their
superstitions as whatever tragedy
disease or famine or some other natural
disaster befell them the rate of their
monument building increased they failed
to try something new to criticize the
way things were done so they went
extinct
over and over again lost civilizations
are testament to not solving their
problems in time
we are unique because we value criticism
but it is a tradition of criticism and
so we have to be careful that the
institutions that preserved that
tradition likewise are protected so we
are making progress fast and slow in
fits and starts and it has been
unrelenting for a time
but it's not inevitable we need
resources to build it energy to fuel it
david attenborough and other naturalists
have gifted the world with a deep
misconception over many decades now and
that misconception is that something
like the tragedy of easter island is an
example of their having consumed the
resources there in an unsustainable way
but this is false it is false because
the island could never sustain them in
the first place the island was always a
death trap it had not enough trees that
grew not fast enough it had insufficient
arable land too little drinking water
storms hit them drought hit them what
they had of crops routinely destroyed by
weather or pests bacteria and worse got
into their water supply when it did rain
it was a hell hole and if they knew how
to sail elsewhere to somewhere with more
resources more pleasant they would have
done so or if they knew how to use the
resources already there perhaps more
importantly they would have survived
nothing is a resource after all until
the knowledge of how to use it as such
is discovered resources are plentiful
the earth cannot sustain us into the
indefinite future the lesson of easter
island is that we need to make progress
faster we need more energy and cheap
energy not less we should be optimistic
that problems are soluble there are many
many problems ahead of us climate change
is one of them if we want to survive it
or whatever we eventually will discover
is way worse than climate change we must
have more wealth wealth we define as the
repertoire of physical transformations
we are capable of making to have more
wealth we should be seeking out more and
cheaper resources and exploiting them if
we have insufficient wealth when the
proverbial asteroid or even worse virus
eventually does arrive we will not be
sustained by anything else but our
wealth all we've got is our knowledge
that unique capacity that the laws of
physics allows in us to understand
anything out there in the universe and
thus solve any problem we try to
throughout the decades people have drawn
incorrect guesses about the future which
we call prophecies that suggest doom is
coming they say the world is entering a
new ice age presently we are told we are
entering a period of warming while we
should take seriously the explanations
of the experts on these matters when
they are brought to us we should also
keep in mind that slowing progress and
reducing wealth by concentrating it in
the hands of authorities is not a
solution it does not create rapid
knowledge growth and progress to solve a
problem we need knowledge and that
knowledge could come from anywhere it
could come from a child presently
struggling to learn to read in an
impoverished country somewhere if only
they had very cheap electricity and
semiconductors that child could be
interacting on the web with people
learning to read far more rapidly and
eventually learning the physics needed
for him or her to solve the problem of
climate change quickly and efficiently
perhaps by uncovering what it takes to
make electricity from fusion reactors
more cheaply we cannot know that this is
not the case who knows what resources
are yet to be discovered and which will
make many of our present political
discussions moot in light of a new fuel
source a way to suck carbon dioxide out
of the atmosphere it was once said that
the only way for a color television to
work was with phosphors and the red
phosphor acquired europium supplies were
finite on earth and so it was a
mathematical certainty that colour
television would eventually be a thing
of the past once the europium was
consumed but no one now uses europium
for the production of red pixels on
screens we use lcd technology the lesson
here should not be lost on anyone the
growth of knowledge is unpredictable and
so we should have a stance of optimism
with regards to what people can actually
achieve when left to their own creative
capacity to learn and discover my key
takeaway from this chapter is that
nothing is a resource until the
knowledge of why it is has been
discovered it is only knowledge that
changes rocks into pure metals or
uranium ore into electricity chapter 18
the beginning it is sometimes claimed we
are near the end of discovering
everything that is to be discovered that
not merely as the human mind finite in
scope but the very laws of physics
themselves have almost all been
discovered
this was even the prevailing view under
newtonian physics at the end of the 19th
century it was thought newton was lucky
to have uncovered the laws of physics
einstein and his relativity and einstein
and his quantum theory and the quantum
theory of lots of other people showed
that impulse wrong
but it's not gone away john hogan wrote
a book called the end of science which
captures the mood of many scientists and
even physicists there isn't much more to
know on this view people talk about a
final theory of everything where the
four known forces
are unified and then we will have an
equation for printing on a t-shirt that
will be able to predict everything that
happens anywhere forever in principle or
once we have a complete understanding of
neuroscience then we will have a
complete understanding of the human mind
once we have a complete understanding of
genetics then biology will almost be
done but all of this is terribly
pessimistic it says that progress must
come to an end in this place or that
place and perhaps altogether it also
says
we aren't error-prone but our
fallibility means that we will never
have perfect knowledge error is simply a
part of us and our knowledge and this is
wonderful it means error correction must
go on forever it means there can be no
final theory and so progress has no war
before it beyond which no further
discovery is possible we are instead
just scratching the surface and always
will be should we find a way to unify
gravity with the three fundamental
forces we can ask why is g the value it
is why does it have that strength why is
that law the one that operates in our
universe and not something else what is
the theory that explains the physics we
have discovered we will want to go
deeper are there actually other
universes with other physical laws in
what sense were other laws even possible
if they are possible where are they
if not possible why not our future
understandings of deeper reality are
still before us but we can rule out some
bad ideas now for example quantum theory
is not fully understood whatever that
could mean fully there can be no fully
nevertheless some people have postulated
that because we live in a multiverse we
might be immortal this is on the theory
that should you die in this universe
that you occupy you persist in the
others
and the problem with this is well we
don't understand the place of
consciousness in the multiverse exactly
for a start and besides if you are a
person who did not did not
just commit quantum suicide or just
plain old suicide
why should you then suddenly become the
person that did a person that survives
quantum suicide presumably does so
because they never actually did commit
suicide that person who actually did
commit suicide
they're no longer part of this strange
thought experiment
we don't know enough we can also rule
out living in a matrix or plato's cave
or being deceived by descartes demon or
that we are simply dreaming reality into
existence the most recent famous example
that's logically equivalent to all of
these is of course bostrom simulation
argument which says that in the future
people will build supercomputers on
which whole universes or even whole
multiverses will be simulated and those
will outnumber the number of base
realities presumably there's just one of
those so we should presume to be in a
simulation we can become superhuman we
already are compared to the ancients and
those people drawing in caves we can go
on extending our lives and extending our
reach my key takeaway for this chapter
is a special one it's simply quoting the
last three sentences of the book
quote there is only one way of thinking
that is capable of making progress or of
surviving in the long run
and that is the way of seeking good
explanations through creativity and
criticism what lies ahead of us in any
case is infinity all we can choose is
whether it is an infinity of ignorance
or of knowledge
right or wrong
death or life
end quote well there we go that is my
omnibus episode going through all 18
chapters of the beginning of infinity
and 99 minutes and all because i still
continue to regard this book as the most
groundbreaking book of the 21st century
i can't claim to have read all the books
from the 20th century i think the fabric
of reality might be there at the top of
that particular century
and we don't know what's coming next
either maybe david's next book
throughout my podcast series i still
plan on referring more to the beginning
of infinity and next episode we will
have the complete interview episode 100
between myself and david deutsch and
then episodes 101 and 102 ask me
anything episodes as well so there's a
lot to come on the theme of the work of
david deutsch the beginning of infinity
and associated ideas
but until next time bye-bye
you